=======
muMerge
=======

A tool for combining bed regions from multiple bed files in a probabilistically-prinipled manner.

Installation
============

It is recommended to install ``mumerge`` using a virtual environment or package manager---e.g. ``venv`` or ``conda``. Specifically, because ``bedtools`` must be available at the command line we recommend you create a new environment with ``conda`` and install ``bedtools`` from bioconda, as follows:
::

    (base) $ conda create -n mumerge_env python=3.9
    (base) $ conda activate mumerge_env
    (mumerge_env) $ conda install -c bioconda bedtools

To confirm installation, check the ``bedtools`` version:
::

    (mumerge_env) $ bedtools --version
    bedtools v2.30.0

Now, with ``bedtools`` available within your environment you can install ``mumerge`` as follows.

Via ``pip``
-----------
The simplest way of installing ``mumerge`` within your virtual environment is using ``pip``. Check that ``pip`` is installed in your virtual environment and if not install it (e.g. ``conda install pip``). Also, be sure to use the appropriate version of Python if you have multiple versions installed. ``mumerge`` can then be installed with one of the following commands. 

From PyPI (recommended):
::

    $ python -m pip install mumerge

If successful, ``mumerge`` should now be callable from the command line.

From GitHub:
::

    $ python -m pip install git+https://github.com/Dowell-Lab/mumerge

In order to upgrade to the latest version of ``mumerge`` from a previous one, include ``--upgrade`` in other of the previous ``pip`` commands.

Via ``git clone``
-----------------
Alternatively, you can download ``mumerge`` and all supporting files by cloning the GitHub repository to your local machine using ``git``:
::

    $ git clone https://github.com/Dowell-Lab/mumerge.git

If you clone the repo, you may want to add directory ``mumerge/mumerge`` to your system ``PATH`` variable (this will depend on your platform/OS) so that you can run ``mumerge`` directly from the command-line.

Dependencies
============

* Python\>=3.6 https://www.python.org/downloads/
* NumPy https://numpy.org/
* bedtools https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/content/installation.html

NumPy will be installed automatically when using ``pip`` to install ``mumerge``. However, ``bedtools`` must be installed manually and made available in your system path prior to running ``mumerge``.

Bedtools
--------
muMerge relies on ``bedtools`` in order to group together those bed regions from the input bed files that will be combined probabilistically by muMerge. This grouping is done using the ``bedtools merge`` command, which must be available at the command line.

Usage
=====

For general usage, see the help menu:
::

    $ mumerge -h

This will return the general commands needed to run muMerge:
::

    usage: mumerge.py [-h] [-H] [-i INPUT] [-o OUTPUT] [-w WIDTH] [-m MERGED] [-r] [-v]

    Merges region calls (mu) generated by Tfit, or other peak calling functions across
    multiple samples and replicates.

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -H, --HELP            Verbose help info about the input format.
      -i INPUT, --input INPUT
                            Input file (full path) containing bedfiles, sample ID's and
                            replicate grouping names (tab delimited). Each sample on separate
                            line. First line header, equal to '#file<TAB>sampid<TAB>group',
                            required. 'file' must be full path. 'sampid' can be any string.
                            'group' can be string or integer. See '-H' help flag for more
                            information.
      -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
                            Output file basename (full path, sans extension). WARNING:
                            will overwrite any existing file)
      -w WIDTH, --width WIDTH
                            The ratio of a the sigma for the corresponding probabilty
                            distribution to the bed region (half-width) --- sigma:half-bed
                            (default: 1). The choice for this parameter will depend on the
                            data type as well as how bed regions were inferred from the
                            expression data.
      -m MERGED, --merged MERGED
                            Sorted bedfile (full path) containing the regions over which
                            to combine the sample bedfiles. If not specified, mumerge will
                            generate one directly from the sample bedfiles.
      -r, --remove_singletons
                            Remove calls not present in more than 1 sample
      -v, --verbose         Verbose printing during processing.

Input file
----------
The ``<INPUT>`` file is a tab delimited text file that contains paths to BED files to be merged along with sample names as condition/replicate information for each sample. In the example below, there are 4 samples with two treatment groups.
::

    #file   sampid  group
    /path/to/sample1.bed    sample1 control
    /path/to/sample2.bed    sample2 control
    /path/to/sample3.bed    sample3 treatment
    /path/to/sample4.bed    sample4 treatment

You can find this information using the ``-H`` flag---i.e. running ``mumerge -H``, which will return the following:
::

    INPUT FILE
    ----------
    Input file containing bedfiles, sample ID's, and replicate groupings. Input
    file (indicated by the '-i' flag) should be of the following (tab delimited)
    format:
    
    #file   sampid  group
    /full/path/file1.bed    sampid1 A
    /full/path/file2.bed    sampid2 B
    ...
    
    Header line indicated by '#' character must be included and fields must
    follow the same order as non-header lines. The order of subsequent lines does
    not matter. File paths should be full paths to bed files, however you can
    also specify paths that are relative to the input file location. 'group'
    identifiers should group files that are technical/biological replicates.
    Different experimental conditions should recieve different 'group' identifiers.
    The 'group' identifier can be of type 'int' or 'str'. If 'sampid' is not
    specified, then default sample ID's will be used.

Output files
------------
muMerge returns the merged regions in BED file format (``project_id_MUMERGE.bed``). Additionally, a log file (``project_id.log``) that details the summary of the run is also inlcuded along with intermediate files (``project_id_MISCALLS.bed`` and ``project_id_BEDTOOLS_MERGE.bed``).

Demo
----
The additional help menu (``mumerge -H``) also contains information on a muMerge demo included with the package. The menu will specify where the demo files are located (install location depends on the platform) and how to run them. The demo consists of an input muMerge file which references two short bedfiles (``a.bed`` and ``b.bed``) that are located in the same directory. Running the demo (replace ``<fullpath>`` with the path to the input file which depends on where you installed it):

::

    $ mumerge -v -i <fullpath>/mumerge_demo.input -o ./demo_out

will return the following to stdout:

::

    Generating 'bedtools merge' bedfile...
    Building bed-regions dictionary...
    # Sample_ID      Filename
    # sampA          <fullpath>/a.bed
    # sampB          <fullpath>/b.bed
    Processed 2 of 2 regions

and will produce the following files:

::

    ./demo_out.log
    ./demo_out_BEDTOOLS_MERGE.bed
    ./demo_out_MISCALLS.bed
    ./demo_out_MUMERGE.bed

If run correctly, ``demo_out_MUMERGE.bed`` should have two bed lines (``chr1    150     350`` and ``chr1    600     900``), ``demo_out_MISCALLS.bed`` should be empty, and ``demo_out.log`` should contain meta information about the run.

Platforms
---------

* Linux
* macOS
* Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)

Runtime
-------
The overall run time depends on the the number of input BED files and regions being merged. A test case, where 8 samples (~30,000 regions) with 6 condition groups were merged, took about 12 minutes on a MacBook Pro iCore i9 2.3 GHz running macOS v 10.14.6.

Cite
====

Please cite the following article if you use muMerge: `Transcription factor enrichment analysis (TFEA) quantifies the activity of multiple transcription factors from a single experiment <https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02153-7>`_

BibTeX citation:

::

    @article{rubin2021transcription,
      title={Transcription factor enrichment analysis (TFEA) quantifies the activity of multiple transcription factors from a single experiment},
      author={Rubin, Jonathan D and Stanley, Jacob T and Sigauke, Rutendo F and Levandowski, Cecilia B and Maas, Zachary L and Westfall, Jessica and Taatjes, Dylan J and Dowell, Robin D},
      journal={Communications biology},
      volume={4},
      number={1},
      pages={1--15},
      year={2021},
      publisher={Nature Publishing Group}
    }
